# NBA Draft Player Analysis

# Introduction
---
This project is designed to take a deeper dive into the NBA draft, the ultimate prediction. Every year, teams build their list of the players in the draft they believe will have the most NBA success. Despite far-reaching advancements (and investments) across NBA front offices in data science  and scouting, it's still a crap shoot. Teams consistently spend high draft picks to draft players that never see the floor and live up to their projections. This happens for many different reasons; some are predictable and others are not. 

In the 2012 NBA Draft, the Sacramento Kings had the 5th pick. With their selection, they took Thomas Robinson, a third-year, 6-9 forward/center out of Kansas. Robinson was appealing because he had athleticism that many believed would translate to the NBA right away and played for a strong Kansas team that went toe-to-toe with Anthony Davis' Kentucky super team. But a quick glance at his statistics showed a few red flags. For starters, almost every NBA player needs to excel at one of these things: Rim protection, Perimeter Defense, Shot Creation or Playmaking. In his three years at Kansas, Robinson did not show any of these skills proficiently. Rim protection - he had only a 1.1 blocks per 40 minutes. Roy Hibbert, the standard bearer of modern rim protection had 3.4 blocks per 40. Anthony Davis, one of the best modern big men in the NBA had 5.8 blocks per game. Clearly, Robinson was not going to bring this skill to the NBA despite his 6-9 height and 7-1 wingspan. At 6-9 and 237 lbs, Robinson had no chance of excelling at perimeter defense. His size would not allow him to keep up with the quickest wings in the league and 1.4 steals per 40 solidifed that. Shot Creation - Robinson took only 14 three pointers in his last year at Kansas, albeit making 7 of them. Perhaps he wasn't given the green light by his coach? This is possible, but his 68% free throw percentage, a good indicator of NBA shooting ability, says otherwise. Playmaking - he averaged a relatively robust 2.3 assists per 40 mins. For a power forward/center that is a decent mark but hardly above average compared to other positions. A true analysis of his stats point to a game that would struggle to translate into the NBA. At pick 6, the Portland Trailblazers selected Damian Lillard, a player that jumps off the page, statistiscally. Lillard played 4 years at Weber State, not exactly a waypoint for future NBA stars, but in that time he accumulated some impressive statistics. Lillard shot the ball exceptionally well with shooting splits of 51/41/89 on a high volume of all three shot types. He clearly had the capabilities to be a shot creator in the NBA. Even his assist to turnover ratio per 40, 4.6:2.7, showed exceptional decision making. Teams likely hesitated to pick him due to the lackluster competition he faced in college and his size, 6-2 height and 185 weight. This is an example of predictable draft evaluation. The stats clearly showed that Damian Lillard was a superior prospect to Thomas Robinson. 

Fast forward to the 2017 draft. The Philadelphia Sixers knew who they wanted. They traded up fromt the 3rd pick to the 1st pick to remove any chance of missing out on Washington guard Markelle Fultz. He played one-year and in that time put up incredible stats. He displayed shot creation, playmaking and perimeter defense to the tune of 26 points per 40, shooting splits of 50/41/65, 6.6 assists per 40, 1.8 steals per 40 and 1.3 blocks per 40 (more than Thomas Robinson). Statistically, this was slam dunk. He wasn't a Lebron-level prospect but there was no reason to believe he wouldn't turn into a high-level starter with all-star potential. Unfortunately, he came into his rookie season and seemingly forgot how to shoot. He was diagnosed with Thoracic Outlet Syndrome and after two years played all of 33 games for the Sixers taking only 15 three pointers (and making 4). THe Sixers could not have anticipated such an event occuring. Nothing about his playing history indicated he was injury prone or would drop off in shooting so much. He shot nearly 6 threes per 40 in college but only .5 per 36 in the NBA. You could argue that his 65% FT percentage indicated his 40% three point shooting wouldn't translate to the NBA but still it should have impacted his penchant to take him. This is an example of an unpredictable draft outcome. Markelle's college stats showed NBA promise but so far, he hasn't come close to those expectations. 

# Project Objective
---

The objective of this project is to predict the outcomes of NBA Draft prospects using a wide variety of stats and information. 

# Measure of NBA Success
---

Defining NBA success is trickly to say the least. There are a number of metrics available that show how welly a NBA player performs relative to their colleague, both present and past. None of them are perfect, but many do an accurate job assessing player value. This project uses two forms of measures for NBA success - 4-year Max NBA VORP based on Basketball Reference and Peak player outcomes broken into 4 classes based on minutes played and All-star sselections. 

